# Suggestions on what data to cut
This is a compilation of what to remove in step 2 of visual inspection. The artefacts are ordered by "severity". Especially near the end, the decision comes down to whether an artefact is interfereing with your main analysis, or if you've been removing too much data. 

Since this is an "arbitrary" process, it is important that you don't introduce systematic bias, for example cleaning seperately conditions you later compare, especially if you have reason to believe they might have different levels of noise.
It's also best if you don't know what file you're cleaning each time.

The criteria in order of importance when deciding what to remove or not:
1. **How big is it?** If the occurance involves crazy high amplitudes relative to the rest of the signal, it needs removing.
2. **Does it have any signal left in it?** If the noise is such that you can't see any underlying EEG, then it should be removed, no doubt.
3. **Could it mask important EEG effects?** If the noise has similar properties to the type of analysis you'll be doing, such as a certain spectrum (1-40Hz), you'll want to get rid of it if you're sure that it's not infact generated by the brain.
4. **Does it clearly look un-physiological?** If the noise is clearly not data, like periodic spikes, it makes sense to remove them.
5. **Does it clearly not come from the brain?** This especially applies to muscle artefacts; if you're confident it's not some high-frequency beta burst, but rather muscle activity, I would remove it. 


When NOT to remove some data:
1. **It's possibly brain data**: don't remove anything that is plausably generated by the brain, and only by the brain. Err on the side of caution if you're uncertain, and leave it in.
2. **It can be removed with ICA**: don't remove anything that you know will go away with ICA, namely eye movements (blinks, saccades, rolling eye movements) and heartbeat. Vice versa, if you know something can't be properly removed with ICA (like single-occurance events, or high-frequency bursts), it's a good reason to cut it out. 
3. **The discontinuity is more detrimental than the noise**: if an artefact is small, selecting it as a segment to be removed can create more of an artefact from "edge artifacts", for example in power calculations or ERPs.
4. **Too much data has been removed, and it's not too bad**. This applies when you have a lot of worse noise in the file, and this timepoint/channel still preserves a reasonable amount of signal. It's a judgement call, because the alternative would be to not include the file at all, and some statistics really don't like that, and if you have a low n (e.g. clinical data), you often can't afford to be too picky. In practice, I've had this happen with a) mild muscle activity when many other channels had a lot of high muscle activity b) low amplitude low frequency irregular fluctuations in most channels. 
[picture]()

What counts as too much data being removed? I don't actually know. With 128 channels, there's a lot of redundant information in neighboring channels, and so interpolation (last preprocessing step) recovers essentially all the relevant EEG, especially for <12hz information. This process works less well when the channels being removed are on the periphery, but these also tend to contain less brain data in general. My personal criterion was whether the remaining channels/timepoints still captured visible EEG events in more than 1 channel (and again anything that would be removed with ICA).

Recommendation: if there are channels that are removed in a majority of datasets, jut remove them in all of the datasets.


## Channels to remove
Sometimes artefacts appear and disappear in a single channel. In this case, the decision comes down to whether you would remove more data by taking out a channel (1/128) vs the time segment. I also remove channels if I don't have an explanation for why the artefact appeared and disappeared.




## Segments to remove
